# A Novel Multidimensional Fast Fourier Transform Algorithm

The multidimensional Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) arises in a number of disciplines.  Making an algorithm perform well is a non-trivial task because of the memory access patterns.  Conventional algorithms first do a one-dimensional FFT on the dimension stored contiguously in memory, transpose the array, and do the FFT on the dimension that is then contiguous in memory, repeating for the number of dimensions.  At the end, the array is often transposed to bring the data back into the order expected by the rest of the program.  Measurements show that the algorithm used by FFTW, the most widely used library, can take a substantial fraction of the total time doing the transpose.

It is possible to transpose an array in log(n) steps using an inverse shuffle transpose.  The key observation is that this access pattern is exactly that of the FFT.  The code in this repository demonstrates that the transpose can be combined with the FFT butterflies in a way that eliminates the transpose step.  The algorithm works on arrays of any number of dimensions and mixed radix FFTs at the cost of needing (_radix_-1)/_radix_ more storage that in-place algorithms that require a transpose.  The algorithm also requires a bit reversal step, but that is trivial for multidimensional arrays where each row fits in chache.

## History of this Project

The idea of the inverse shuffle transpose first occurred to me in 1976 while I was a postdoc at IBM Research Yorktown Heights.  I recognized that the access pattern was the same as the FFT, but it took me a while to realize that I needed a bit reversal to make it work.  By that time, I was working at the IBM Scientific Center on other projects.  I finally had a chance to return to the FFT in the late 1980s when I became an Ames Associate at NASA.  That's where I produced the code in this repository and measured its performance on the supercomputers of the day, the Cray Y-MP and the IBM Vector Facility, along with the Convex and Alliant mini-supercomputers.  My benchmarks showed that this algorithm performed as well or better than the highly optimized FFT libraries provided by the vendors.  At that point I started wrting the paper included in this repository.

In 1992, IBM closed its Scientific Centers, and I moved to HP Labs, which had no interest in my FFT algorithm.  By the time I got a chance to work on it again, the HPC world had moved to highly parallel machines, which I had no access to.  This work has languished while I look for a partner with access to modern supercomputer who can validate the performance advantage that I found on vector uniprocessors.  Contact me if you're interested.
